docs: add info about automatic application discovery (#1353)
keptn/lifecycle-toolkit: docs/content/en/docs/implementing/integrate/index.md

---
title: Integrate KLT with your applications
description: How to integrate the Keptn Lifecycle Toolkit into your Kubernetes cluster
icon: concepts
layout: quickstart
weight: 45
hidechildren: false # this flag hides all sub-pages in the sidebar-multicard.html
---

Use Kubernetes annotations and labels
to integrate the Keptn Lifecycle Toolkit into your Kubernetes cluster.

> The Keptn Lifecycle Toolkit monitors manifests
> that have been applied against the Kubernetes API

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Keptn Lifecycle Toolkit monitors resources
that have been applied into the Kubernetes cluster
```

and reacts if it finds a workload with special annotations/labels.
This is a four-step process:

* [Enable the target namespace](#enable-target-namespace)
* [Annotate your workload(s)](#annotate-workloads)
* Define a Keptn application that references those workloads.
  You have two options:

  * [Define Keptn custom resources](#define-keptn-custom-resources-for-the-application)
    for the application
  * [Use the Keptn automatic app discovery capability](#use-keptn-automatic-app-discovery)
    that enables the observability features provided by the Lifecycle Toolkit
    for existing applications,

>     without requiring you to create any Keptn-related custom resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    without requiring you to manually create any KeptnApp resources.
```

## Enable target namespace

To enable the Keptn Lifecycle Controller in your cluster,
annotate the Kubernetes
[Namespace](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/namespaces/);
for example:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Namespace
metadata:
  name: simplenode-dev
  annotations:
    keptn.sh/lifecycle-toolkit: "enabled"
```

This annotation tells the webhook to handle the namespace.

## Annotate workload(s)

To annotate your
[Workload](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/),
you need to set annotations in your Kubernetes

> [Deployment](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/deployment/) CRD.

Reviewer: Here we can set annotation to Pods/Deployments/StatefulSets/DeamonSets

Note that you do not need to explicitly create a `KeptnWorkload`.
KLT monitors your `Deployments`,
[StatefulSets](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/statefulset/),
and
[ReplicaSets](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/replicaset/),
and
[DaemonSets](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/daemonset/)
in the namespaces where KLT is enabled.
If KLT finds any of hese CRDs and the CRD has either
the keptn.sh or the kubernetes recommended labels,

> it creates a `KeptnWorkload` CRD for the version it detects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it creates a `KeptnWorkload` resource for the version it detects.
```

```

Alternatively, you can use Kubernetes
[Recommended Labels](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/common-labels/)
to annotate your workload:

```yaml
app.kubernetes.io/part-of: myAwesomeAppName
app.kubernetes.io/name: myAwesomeWorkload
app.kubernetes.io/version: myAwesomeWorkloadVersion
```

Note the following:

* The Keptn Annotations/Labels take precedence
  over the Kubernetes recommended labels.
* If the Workload has no version annotation/labels
  and the pod has only one container,
  the Lifecycle Toolkit takes the image tag as version
  (if it is not "latest").

This process is demonstrated in the
[Keptn Lifecycle Toolkit: Installation and KeptnTask Creation in Mintes](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hh01bBwZ_qM)
video.

### Pre- and post-deployment checks

Further annotations are necessary
to run pre- and post-deployment checks:

```yaml
keptn.sh/pre-deployment-tasks: verify-infrastructure-problems
keptn.sh/post-deployment-tasks: slack-notification,performance-test
```

The value of these annotations are
Keptn [CRDs](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/api-extension/custom-resources/)
called `KeptnTaskDefinition`s.

> These CRDs contain re-usable "functions"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These resources contain re-usable "functions"
```

that can execute before and after the deployment.
In this example, before the deployment starts,
a check for open problems in your infrastructure is performed.
If everything is fine, the deployment continues and afterward,
a slack notification is sent with the result of the deployment
and a pipeline to run performance tests is invoked.
Otherwise, the deployment is kept in a pending state
until the infrastructure is capable of accepting deployments again.

A more comprehensive example can be found in our
[examples folder](https://github.com/keptn/lifecycle-toolkit/tree/main/examples/sample-app),
where we use [Podtato-Head](https://github.com/podtato-head/podtato-head)
to run some simple pre-deployment checks.

To run the example, use the following commands:

```shell
cd ./examples/podtatohead-deployment/
kubectl apply -f .
```

Afterward, you can monitor the status of the deployment using

```shell
kubectl get keptnworkloadinstance -n podtato-kubectl -w
```

The deployment for a Workload stays in a `Pending`

> state until the respective pre-deployment check is completed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
state until the respective pre-deployment check is successfully completed.
```

> Afterwards, the deployment starts and when it is marked  `Succeeded`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Afterwards, the deployment starts and when the workload is deployed,
```

the post-deployment checks start.

## Define a Keptn application

  You have two options:

* Create a [KeptnApp](../../yaml-crd-ref/app.md) resource
    that references the workloads that should be included
    along with any
    [KeptnTaskDefinition](../../yaml-crd-ref/taskdefinition.md)
    and [KeptnEvaluationDefinition](../../yaml-crd-ref/evaluationdefinition.md)
    CRDs that you want
* Use the Keptn automatic app discovery capability
    that enables the observability features provided by the Lifecycle Toolkit
    for existing applications,

>     without requiring you to create any Keptn-related custom resources

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    without requiring you to manually create any KeptnApp resources
```
